Hello everyone! From theory to practice. In this lesson, we
will create an APawn class, consider input, teach our spawn basic movement, and set up our own GameMode class
with this default spawn. Let's pay attention to world settings, where we will configure all the classes of the
current level. By default and all this time we have game mode and all base classes were in None.
But nevertheless, when we launched our group, control was available to us, that is, we could move with
arrows and control the camera with a mouse. What is really going on? Let's press Shift + F1
This removes focus from the game, but the game does not stop, that is, all ticks continue.
If we click again, the focus will return. Press Shift + F1 and look in the world outliner.
In fact, all the classes were spawned unreal. These are the default classes: default pawn, player controller, player state,
game mode base, game state base. That is, if nothing is specified by default, then the level will have all default classes.
And the default pawn has a minimum input, which we use directly.
Now we will create our own pounder and see how all this is configured manually.
We press stop. Set Game Mode Override
to GeometrySandboxGameModeBase. This game mode was created automatically by unreal when we created the project.
Please note that all classes have changed to default ones. We
observe them directly when we press play. If we switch to C ++ and open
our gamemode, we will see that it is completely empty. It inherits from GameModeBase.
And therefore, nothing changes with us. All settings that are currently in GameModeBase are passed to our GameModeSandbox.
Let's create a pawn class. To do this, go to the file -> new C ++ class menu. We select pawn from the list.
Let's call our spawn SandboxPawn.
Click the Create Class button.
Our pawn class has been created. The functions that are generated by default are the same
as those of the actor. The only difference is that the SetupPlayerInputComponent function has been additionally added.
This function configures user input. We will work with him a little later.
First, let's tell our game mode that this spawn class will be the default spawn class.
Go to the header file game mode.
Let's add a constructor for the game mode class. We create a public section.
We declare a constructor.
In the .cpp file, create the body of the constructor function.
In the body of the constructor, write the DefaultPawnClass
equals .. Press F12 on the DefaultPawnClass. The GameModeBase header file has opened.
The DefaultPawnClass is the property of this class. It sets the class on the basis of which
game mode will create the pawn object. We have already used the TSubclassOf template.
This property can be installed in the blueprint version of the game mode, but it can also be changed in C ++.
Return to the .cpp file of our game mod. Let's include the sandbox pawn header file.
To get a pointer to UClass, there is a special function called StaticClass.
The function is static. Thus, in our game mode, we override the default pawn class.
We launch the editor.
The editor has opened and if we look at the world settings panel, we will see that the default pawn class has changed to sandbox pawn.
That is, we have redefined the default pawn in our game mode. Let's go back to C ++ for a second.
Click on the base class GameModeBase F12. Let's fall into the header file.
If you press F12 again on any function, then we will fall into the .cpp file. At the very top of the file, we see the body of the base class constructor.
In the constructor, we can see how all the main classes of the framework are concatenated.
DefaultPawnClass, PlayerControllerClass and so on.
In our game mode, you and I have redefined the DefaultPawnClass so far. We return to the editor, start the game.
And now we cannot move around the stage. Camera rotation does not work. This is
because our spawn class doesn't handle user input in any way. Let's fix that by going
to the edit -> project settings menu. The project settings window opens. We need a subcategory input.
Let's select it in the list, click, we get into the binding section. Binding is the binding of a username
to some action: whether it be pressing a key on the keyboard, pressing a mouse button,
moving the mouse, or pressing a button on a controller. Bindings are divided into 2 types. The first one is action mappings.
And the second is axis mappings. Action mapping is a discrete action. We receive the callback event
only once, for example, when the user pressed a key, and axis mapping is a continuous
receipt of the state of the control, that is, if we hold down the button, then every tick we will
receive a value that the button is pressed or, for example, we can keep track of the position of the mouse.
An input has been created in the interface, in which you need to enter the name of our action. Let's call it MoveForward.
This binding will be responsible for moving our paun forward.
We are looking for the up key. We choose it. We also see that there is a scale parameter.
This value is multiplied by the current mapping axis value. We will see how it works very soon.
We can add an additional button to the same mapping. Down button.
And do not create a new mapping for move backward, but simply set the down scale to -1.
Let's create another mapping. We call it move right.
Find the right key in the list.
And by analogy with move forward, add the left key.
And set the scale to -1.
We created two mappings for the movement of our paun. Assigned them keyboard keys
that will call these actions. Let's go to the code. We are now ready to program the movement of the pawn.
Let's start with a little bit of work in the header file and create all the necessary variables and
functions, and then program everything in the .cpp file. Let's create a property for the root component.
We will make a special component called SceneComponent as root in our pawn.
This component has no visual representation and contains only the
transformation in the world. You can attach other components to the SceneComponent. We will see this
in the next lecture. Next, we need a property that will store the speed of the pawn movement.
The variable type will be float. Let's call it Velocity.
And by default we will set some value. Let it be 300.
Add a private section at the bottom of the header file.
We need one more member of the FVector type class,
which will store the velocity vector of our spawn. We call the change VelocityVector. By default, let this vector
be zero. You can use a special constant of the FVector type called ZeroVector.
Let's create two functions that will be called when the actions are called.
The first function will be responsible for moving forward / backward. Let's call it MoveForward.
The function has one parameter, float. All functions that are bound to axis mapping must have one parameter.
We will see very soon what comes in this parameter.
The second function will have the same signature. Let's call it MoveRight.
Let's create a body for each function in a .cpp file.
We close the header file, we will no longer need it. And go to the .cpp file.
Go to the pawn constructor and create the SceneCompnent component.
This component will be the root one, so we call the SetRootComponent function.
And we pass a pointer to the SceneComponent into it.
We also create a pawn our own logging category. We copy the macro.
Insert and name the category LogSandboxPawn.
Let's go to the MoveForward function. Let's log in the amount parameter.
We do the same in the MoveRight function.
Let's make it so that our functions are called when the corresponding mappings are triggered.
To do this, go to SetupPlayerInputComponent.
We need to add a header file where InputComponent is declared. Let's do it.
It is located at "Components / InputComponent.h"
In order to bind functions to the corresponding mappings, there are two functions in the InputComponent.
One of them is called BindAction, and the second is BindAxis. Now we need the BindAxis function.
In the first argument, we pass the name of our MoveForward mapping.
The second argument is a pointer to an object.
And the third argument is a reference to the function we want to call.
If you press F12, look into the code of this function, you can see that the delegate bind that is already
familiar to us is happening inside, but in a slightly different form. Duplicate the line of code, replace MoveForward
with MoveRight and start programming the pawn movement. We will change the value of the velocity vector
depending on the variable Amount. Now we will not deal with vector mathematics with you, we will
assume that the actor moves either along the X-axis or along the Y-axis. Therefore, in the MoveForward function
of VeolocityVector we will change the X component, and in the MoveRight function we will change the Y component. We assign the
value of the variable to the X component Amount. Looking ahead, I want to say right away that
the Amount value will be either 1, or -1, or 0, that is, when the key is not
pressed, the value 0 will come, when we pressed up then the Amount will be 1, and when we
pressed Down then The Amount will be -1, because we specified the scale parameter.
In the MoveRight function, change the Y component of the VelocityVector.
VelocityVector changes the values ​​depending on the input, and we can each frame, that is, in the Tick function,
change the position of our spawn depending on the given vector.
First, let's check that this vector is not zero, if it is zero, then you can not do the calculations again.
The FVector class has a special function called IsZero. This function returns true when all components of the
current vector are zero. We can press F12 and make sure that this is indeed the case.
Create a local constant like FVector. It will store the new pawn position,
which we need to set. We name the variable NewLocation and it will be calculated
using the formula for uniform rectilinear motion. We take the current position of the actor
in space, that is, the value returned by the GetActorLocation function.
And we assign it the speed value multiplied by DeltaTime and multiplied by VelocityVector.
After that we need to set a new position for our pawn. To do this, call
the SetActorLocation function and pass the NewLocation constant into it.
We launch the editor.
We open the log, clear, press play, check our keys: forward, backward, left, right and look
at the console, when we press the forward button, then Forward becomes one, when we release it - 0,
when back, then our scale = -1 is triggered and the actor moves in the opposite direction.